Documentation/Configuration/ConfigureTypo3.rst, before:

.. include:: /Includes.rst.txt
.. highlight:: typoscript

.. _config-typo3:

==========================
TYPO3 Configuration Basics
==========================

Just in case you are not familiar with how to configure TYPO3, we will
give you a very brief introduction. Otherwise, you can safely
skip this part and continue reading
:ref:`config-concepts`.

We only cover configuration methods that are used to configure `rte_ckeditor`.


.. _config-typo3-page-tsconfig:

Page TSconfig
=============

Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

Page TSconfig can be used to change:

#.  Default preset::

      RTE.default.preset = full

#. Override for one field (:typoscript:`RTE.config.[tableName].[fieldName].preset`)::

      RTE.config.tt_content.bodytext.preset = myCustomPreset
      RTE.config.tx_news_domain_model_news.bodytext.preset = minimal

#. Override for one field defined in flexform (:typoscript:`RTE.config.[tableName].[flexForm.field.name].preset`)::

      RTE.config.tt_content.settings.notifications.emailText.preset = myCustomPreset

#. Override for one field, if type matches (:typoscript:`RTE.config.[tableName].[fieldName].types.[type].preset`)::

      RTE.config.tt_content.bodytext.types.textmedia.preset = minimal

For more examples, see :ref:`t3tsconfig:pageTsRte` in "TSconfig Reference".

How to change values
--------------------

As Page TSconfig always applies to a page and its subpages, you can modify it by
editing a page.

#. Go to the :guilabel:`Web > Page` module.
#. Select a page in the page tree (usually your root page).
#. Click on the button to :guilabel:`Edit page properties`

   .. figure:: images/edit_page_properties.png
      :class: with-shadow

#. Select the :guilabel:`Resources` tab
#. Enter the Page TSconfig in the field :guilabel:`"Page TSconfig"`


Additionally, you can add Page TSconfig in an extension: :file:`Configuration/TSconfig/Page`, see
:ref:`best-practice-sitepackage`.

How to view settings
--------------------

Go to the module :guilabel:`Web > Info` and select :guilabel:`Page TSconfig`.


.. _config-typo3-global-configuration:

Global Configuration
====================

Global Configuration is a system-wide general configuration.

Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

The setting :php:`$GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']` is used to configure
the available presets for rich text editing.

By default, the presets "minimal", "default" and "full" are defined.

If you add a new preset, you must add it to this array.


How to change values
--------------------

Usually, Global Configuration can be configured in the backend in
:guilabel:`Admin Tools > Settings > Configure Installation-Wide Options`.

However, the settings relevant for rich text editing, :php:`$GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']`
cannot be configured in the backend.

You must either configure this in:

#. The file :file:`typo3conf/AdditionalConfiguration.php`
#. Or in an extension in the file :file:`EXT:<extkey>/ext_localconf.php`

.. code-block:: php

   if (empty($GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']['myCustomPreset'])) {
       $GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']['myCustomPreset'] = 'EXT:<extkey>/Configuration/RTE/MyCustomPreset.yaml';
   }


How to view settings
--------------------

You can view the Global Configuration in
:guilabel:`System > Configuration > $GLOBAL['TYPO3_CONF_VARS'] (Global Configuration) > RTE`.

.. figure:: images/global-configuration-rte.png
   :class: with-shadow

   Global Configuration: RTE > Presets



.. _config-typo3-yaml:

YAML
====

Most of the configuration of `rte_ckeditor` will be done in a YAML file.


Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

See :ref:`config-ref`

How to change values
--------------------

This is done directly in the file. The YAML file should be included in a
sitepackage extension, see :ref:`best-practice-sitepackage`.


.. _config-typo3-tca:

TCA
===

The :abbr:`table configuration array (TCA)` is used to configure database fields and how they will behave in the
backend when edited. It is for example used to define that ``tt_content.bodytext`` should be edited
with a rich text editor.


Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

* :ref:`t3tca:columns-text-properties-enableRichtext`
* :ref:`t3tca:columns-text-properties-richtextConfiguration`

How to change values
--------------------

This must be done in an extension in :file:`Configuration/TCA`. Usually this is done within a custom sitepackage
extension, see :ref:`best-practice-sitepackage`.

How to view settings
--------------------

You can view TCA in the backend:
:guilabel:`System > Configuration > $GLOBAL['TCA'] (Table configuration array)`.

For example, look at :guilabel:`tt_content > columns > bodytext`.

However, you will
find that neither `enableRichtext`, nor `richtextConfiguration` is set here. They
are configured in :guilabel:`tt_content > types` for various content types, for example
look at :guilabel:`tt_content > types > text > columnsOverrides`.

.. figure:: images/column_overrides.png
   :class: with-shadow

   TCA: tt_content > types > text > columnsOverrides > bodytext

Commit message:

[DOCS] Clarify the page TSconfig settings for RTE
Link to the TSconfig reference where it makes sense,
also for setting page TSConfic, as this changed in v12.
We do not need to duplicate the information here.

Releases: main, 11.5
Resolves: #98244
Change-Id: I8c6b76ad8a2101cb84508cd0988c890ca467bd95
Reviewed-on: https://review.typo3.org/c/Packages/TYPO3.CMS/+/75635
Tested-by: Georg Ringer <georg.ringer@gmail.com>
Tested-by: core-ci <typo3@b13.com>
Tested-by: Christian Kuhn <lolli@schwarzbu.ch>
Reviewed-by: Georg Ringer <georg.ringer@gmail.com>
Reviewed-by: Christian Kuhn <lolli@schwarzbu.ch>

Documentation/Configuration/ConfigureTypo3.rst, after:

.. include:: /Includes.rst.txt
.. highlight:: typoscript

.. _config-typo3:

==========================
TYPO3 Configuration Basics
==========================

Just in case you are not familiar with how to configure TYPO3, we will
give you a very brief introduction. Otherwise, you can safely
skip this part and continue reading
:ref:`config-concepts`.

We only cover configuration methods that are used to configure `rte_ckeditor`.

.. _config-typo3-page-tsconfig:

Page TSconfig
=============

We recommend you to put all configurations for the preset in the
:ref:`YAML <config-typo3-yaml>` configuration. However, it is still possible to
override these settings through the page TSconfig.

You can find a list of configuration properties in the :ref:`Page TSconfig
reference, chapter RTE <t3tsconfig:pageTsRte>`.

Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

Page TSconfig can be used to change:

#.  Default preset::

      RTE.default.preset = full

#. Override for one field (:typoscript:`RTE.config.[tableName].[fieldName].preset`)::

      RTE.config.tt_content.bodytext.preset = myCustomPreset
      RTE.config.tx_news_domain_model_news.bodytext.preset = minimal

#. Override for one field defined in flexform (:typoscript:`RTE.config.[tableName].[flexForm.field.name].preset`)::

      RTE.config.tt_content.settings.notifications.emailText.preset = myCustomPreset

#. Override for one field, if type matches (:typoscript:`RTE.config.[tableName].[fieldName].types.[type].preset`)::

      RTE.config.tt_content.bodytext.types.textmedia.preset = minimal


How to change values
--------------------

See the :ref:`Page TSconfig reference,
chapter Setting Page TSconfig <t3tsconfig:setting-page-tsconfig>`. This chapter
also expains how to verify the settings.

.. _config-typo3-global-configuration:

Global Configuration
====================

Global Configuration is a system-wide general configuration.

Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

The setting :php:`$GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']` is used to configure
the available presets for rich text editing.

By default, the presets "minimal", "default" and "full" are defined.

If you add a new preset, you must add it to this array.


How to change values
--------------------

Usually, Global Configuration can be configured in the backend in
:guilabel:`Admin Tools > Settings > Configure Installation-Wide Options`.

However, the settings relevant for rich text editing, :php:`$GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']`
cannot be configured in the backend.

You must either configure this in:

#. The file :file:`typo3conf/AdditionalConfiguration.php`
#. Or in an extension in the file :file:`EXT:<extkey>/ext_localconf.php`

.. code-block:: php

   if (empty($GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']['myCustomPreset'])) {
       $GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']['myCustomPreset'] = 'EXT:<extkey>/Configuration/RTE/MyCustomPreset.yaml';
   }


How to view settings
--------------------

You can view the Global Configuration in
:guilabel:`System > Configuration > $GLOBAL['TYPO3_CONF_VARS'] (Global Configuration) > RTE`.

.. figure:: images/global-configuration-rte.png
   :class: with-shadow

   Global Configuration: RTE > Presets



.. _config-typo3-yaml:

YAML
====

Most of the configuration of `rte_ckeditor` will be done in a YAML file.


Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

See :ref:`config-ref`

How to change values
--------------------

This is done directly in the file. The YAML file should be included in a
sitepackage extension, see :ref:`best-practice-sitepackage`.


.. _config-typo3-tca:

TCA
===

The :abbr:`table configuration array (TCA)` is used to configure database fields and how they will behave in the
backend when edited. It is for example used to define that ``tt_content.bodytext`` should be edited
with a rich text editor.


Relevant Settings for `rte_ckeditor`
------------------------------------

* :ref:`t3tca:columns-text-properties-enableRichtext`
* :ref:`t3tca:columns-text-properties-richtextConfiguration`

How to change values
--------------------

This must be done in an extension in :file:`Configuration/TCA`. Usually this is done within a custom sitepackage
extension, see :ref:`best-practice-sitepackage`.

How to view settings
--------------------

You can view TCA in the backend:
:guilabel:`System > Configuration > $GLOBAL['TCA'] (Table configuration array)`.

For example, look at :guilabel:`tt_content > columns > bodytext`.

However, you will
find that neither `enableRichtext`, nor `richtextConfiguration` is set here. They
are configured in :guilabel:`tt_content > types` for various content types, for example
look at :guilabel:`tt_content > types > text > columnsOverrides`.

.. figure:: images/column_overrides.png
   :class: with-shadow

   TCA: tt_content > types > text > columnsOverrides > bodytext
