Documentation/Configuration/QuickStart.rst, before:

.. include:: ../Includes.txt


.. _config-quickstart:

========================
Configuration Quickstart
========================

Here we explain, how to modify the existing configuration in a few simple steps.

View Existing Configuration
===========================

To familiarize yourself with the configuration, look at the existing configuration
in your TYPO3 website:

To view the existing RTE presets in the "Global Configuration", go to
:guilabel:`SYSTEM > Configuration` in the backend, choose
:guilabel:`$GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS'] (Global Configuration)` and select RTE:

.. figure:: images/global-configuration-rte.png
   :class: with-shadow

   Global Configuration: RTE > Presets

By default, TYPO3 is shipped with three configuration presets:

* default
* full
* minimal

Minimal Example
===============

Here is a very minimal example of changing the default configuration. All
configuration is done in a custom sitepackage extension, see also
:ref:`best-practice-sitepackage`.

Override the configuration preset "default" by adding this in :file:`<my_extension>/ext_localconf.php`
(replace `my_extension` with your extension key):

.. code-block:: php

   $GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']['default'] = 'EXT:my_extension/Configuration/RTE/Default.yaml';

Add the file :file:`Configuration/RTE/Default.yaml` to your extension, use the file
:file:`EXT:rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Full.yaml` as example (see latest 9.5
`Full.yaml <https://github.com/TYPO3/TYPO3.CMS/blob/9.5/typo3/sysext/rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Full.yaml>`__)

We explain the example 'Minimal.yaml' from the core:

.. code-block:: yaml
   :linenos:

   # Load default processing options
   imports:
       - { resource: "EXT:rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Processing.yaml" }
       - { resource: "EXT:rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Editor/Base.yaml" }

   # Minimal configuration for the editor
   editor:
     config:
       toolbarGroups:
         - { name: basicstyles, groups: [ basicstyles] }
         - { name: clipboard, groups: [clipboard, undo] }
       removeButtons:
         - Anchor
         - Superscript
         - Subscript
         - Underline
         - Strike

* line #2: imports existing files to make basic parts reusable and improve structure
  of configuration
* line #9: toolbarGroups, see `toolbarGroups
  <https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor4/latest/api/CKEDITOR_config.html#cfg-toolbarGroups>`__
  and `Understanding CKEditor Toolbar Concepts
  <https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor4/latest/guide/dev_toolbarconcepts.html>`__
* line #12: removeButtons: this deactivates default buttons rendered in the toolbar, see `removeButtons
  <https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor4/latest/api/CKEDITOR_config.html#cfg-removeButtons>`__

Commit message:

[DOCS] Update rte_ckeditor documentation for 10.4 LTS release
Use newer formating, e.g.:

* Definition lists for better readability.
* Content directive to automatically update local TOC.
  To not update by hand.
* Use short :: for yaml examples.
  To shorten rst code and make it more readable.
* Use option directive to highlight options.
* Update intersphinx urls to not trigger redirects.

Always use YAML instead of yaml or Yaml.
Use inline Fluid example, instead of adding it with another tip.
Update Includes.txt to match current state and provide expected css
classes and text roles.

Resolves: #91137
Releases: master
Change-Id: I185c17a80e69b723b292b9c99eddfe4412362f20
Reviewed-on: https://review.typo3.org/c/Packages/TYPO3.CMS/+/64299
Tested-by: Josef Glatz <josefglatz@gmail.com>
Tested-by: Daniel Siepmann <coding@daniel-siepmann.de>
Reviewed-by: Josef Glatz <josefglatz@gmail.com>
Reviewed-by: Daniel Siepmann <coding@daniel-siepmann.de>

Documentation/Configuration/QuickStart.rst, after:

.. include:: ../Includes.txt


.. _config-quickstart:

========================
Configuration Quickstart
========================

Here we explain, how to modify the existing configuration in a few simple steps.

View Existing Configuration
===========================

To familiarize yourself with the configuration, look at the existing configuration
in your TYPO3 website:

To view the existing RTE presets in the "Global Configuration", go to
:guilabel:`SYSTEM > Configuration` in the backend, choose
:guilabel:`$GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS'] (Global Configuration)` and select RTE:

.. figure:: images/global-configuration-rte.png
   :class: with-shadow

   Global Configuration: RTE > Presets

By default, TYPO3 is shipped with three configuration presets:

* default
* full
* minimal

Minimal Example
===============

Here is a very minimal example of changing the default configuration. All
configuration is done in a custom sitepackage extension, see also
:ref:`best-practice-sitepackage`.

Override the configuration preset "default" by adding this in :file:`<my_extension>/ext_localconf.php`
(replace `my_extension` with your extension key):

.. code-block:: php

   $GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['RTE']['Presets']['default'] = 'EXT:my_extension/Configuration/RTE/Default.yaml';

Add the file :file:`Configuration/RTE/Default.yaml` to your extension, use the file
:file:`EXT:rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Full.yaml` as example (see latest 10.4
`Full.yaml <https://github.com/TYPO3/TYPO3.CMS/blob/master/typo3/sysext/rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Full.yaml>`__)

.. todo: change url to Full.yaml after branching master to 10.4

We explain the example :file:`Minimal.yaml` from the core:

.. code-block:: yaml
   :linenos:

   # Load default processing options
   imports:
       - { resource: "EXT:rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Processing.yaml" }
       - { resource: "EXT:rte_ckeditor/Configuration/RTE/Editor/Base.yaml" }

   # Minimal configuration for the editor
   editor:
     config:
       toolbarGroups:
         - { name: basicstyles, groups: [ basicstyles] }
         - { name: clipboard, groups: [clipboard, undo] }
       removeButtons:
         - Anchor
         - Superscript
         - Subscript
         - Underline
         - Strike

line #2
   Imports existing files to make basic parts reusable and improve structure of configuration

line #9 toolbarGroups
   See `toolbarGroups <https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor4/latest/api/CKEDITOR_config.html#cfg-toolbarGroups>`__
   and `Understanding CKEditor Toolbar Concepts <https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor4/latest/guide/dev_toolbarconcepts.html>`__

line #12 removeButtons
   This deactivates default buttons rendered in the toolbar,
   see `removeButtons <https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor4/latest/api/CKEDITOR_config.html#cfg-removeButtons>`__
